---
title: 'On Perception'
date: "2022-03-27" 

---
  
I've been going through a stoic catharsis recently. Or to put it in a better way - I've found catharsis in stoicism. Like any other philosophy, stoicism may or may not be down your alley. But before you register the definition of stoicism that came up in your mind - if it did, allow me to interrupt - stoicism is not about repressing your emotions and being an emotionless rock. Pop culture might have you believe that, but I won't argue about that in this essay. I just want to touch upon the topic of perception for now.  
  
It's wild that people are so different from each other. I'm sure you can list a thousand things about a thousand people that they would think or do, that you would consider remotely impossible for you in terms of behavior. Perception is the source of that - everyone perceives the world differently. The degree of difference varies, but as I think about this, it's amusing how unique everyone's perception of the world is.  
  
Beliefs are the basis of perception. There are people who live in a very strong bubble of their identity. So much so that they're not even aware of its existence. They lead lives in a complete ignorance of any spiritual place - for the lack of a better word. This is neither good nor bad. I avoid attaching moral judgments of 'good' or 'bad' to things. They are so, and it is what it is. Their beliefs form their identity and these beliefs are never challenged within themselves, at least not in the way that the next group of people go about this matter. Ignorance is bliss they say and I have to admit, at times I have found myself wishing that I was one of them. The lack of awareness is so pervasive within them, that if one of them reads this essay they'll find every word and idea unrelatable.  
  
If you find yourself out of the definition above, this essay is for you.  
  
The other group of people - they think. Some of them think too often, others too deeply, and some get into serious trouble because of thinking. Their thoughts directly interact with their beliefs and actions, like an ongoing, relentless, never stopping interaction between parts of a machine.  
  
Stoics like Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius believed that humans have a unique ability to shape their perceptions. They can 'choose' how they want to perceive a matter - exercise their free will. To have a free will in the first place is to be aware of your beliefs and how they affect how you interact with the world and the way you feel about it. Lack of that, and you're jailed, you just don't know, for better or worse.  
  
Coming back to thinking. I want to talk about this in the constraints of a certain feeling and everything that comes as a result of it - desire. Everyone experiences desire(s), period. The desire to be something, to be somewhere, to have something, to get rid of something, be someone. Whatever the form, desire is one of the universally common denominators of the human condition, if not the only one. With desire comes the possibility of pain, and it comes with a very probable possibility. This is where I diverge in thought with Buddhism. If I ask a Buddhist monk to describe desire in one word, they would answer with 'pain' without batting an eyelid. For them desires equal pain, period. But I argue that this matter has a nuance, like all things worthy of talking about. The Buddhists are right in a sense though, because the majority of humanity lives with an approach to life which ensures that desires will be a source of pain. Buddhists correctly identified the nature and consequence of having desires in the vast majority of mankind.  
  
This idea of desires being a source of pain comes from a very transactional model of the world. We live in the future, where a transaction will be made. There's a future in our heads - The desire to be someone, or have something, maybe get rid of something, or achieve something - whatever the form. The whole idea is about achieving the feeling associated with that future event. That's how desires are born - we feel one way in the present and something inside us wants to feel differently.  
  
This transaction has a cost - the cost is our 'present' and the way we feel in the present. Everyone aims for positive feelings - at least all sane people. The belief that the feeling will be achieved in the future, is enough to cement the fact that it is absent in the present. And hence in this model, which is the default for the human soul - desire equals a negative state in the present while the positive state is contingent on something in the future.  
  
'For there is an aim, so will there be a road to walk to it, and on that road the aim will be absent.'  
  
A lot of major philosophies hence preach killing all desire within oneself. Killing desires works very well, like it should. It's a fool-proof solution. No desire, and the whole loop mentioned above never gets triggered. At the same time it is the laziest and a highly impractical solution for the everyday man.  
  
Setting goals is necessary. Having desires is natural. For how else are you supposed to get from one place in life to the other. Attaching our feelings with the process and/or the outcome - that's foolish. Living for a future, living in the future - that's foolish. What tools do we have then to combat this situation?  
  
That's where the first ideas of stoicism start to take shape. Perception, the unique human ability to morph it - in the present, in real time, by using rational thinking developed by conscious effort. Let's think of an alternative model to life then. Before I dive into it, I want to discuss a few truths about the universe that stoics believe to be true, and I personally have found them to be true in my experience of life.  
  
- There are things we can control and things we can't.  
- The only thing we have absolute control over is how we **choose** to perceive events as they unfold. Not what unfolds, but our reaction to them. The reaction determines how we perceive it. Our perception is our reality.  
- It is possible to build a character over time which is built on an awareness of virtues which are available to all humans and the ability to invoke these virtues.  
  
Here I address the first misconception about stoicism. It is not about being emotionless. It is forming a character over time which can minimize all the negative emotions you feel and maximize whatever the opposite of that is - I don't like to use the word 'positivity' or 'happiness'. A character that is aware that courage can be used in the times you're fearful, patience in the time when the road is long and cheerfulness when you find yourself in the abyss. Feelings then according to stoics should not be dependent on a future goal but on the goal in the present of constantly building this character. The way of constantly morphing your perception via conscious selection of virtues to meet the input from the world is difficult to start with, but with practice, I'm assuming it gets into the very fabric of your being and becomes second nature.  
The stoics choose to perceive everything that happens, through a lens of virtues. They preach to build a character that can do this at command, whenever needed, perhaps all the time. Because perception is reality.  
  
  
Feelings in this case are attached to the pursuit to build and exercise a character in the present which has immediate benefits in the now and not to a goal in the future. Perhaps no one will ever build the perfect stoic character. I'm sure neither Epictetus nor Aurelius themselves got there in each moment of their lives. But more often than not, they spent their lives in the present - and isn't that something.  
  
There are still many questions left unanswered. One of them being - 'It's fine to live in the present, strive to build character, but what about the goal - does all this guarantee success when it comes to the goal?' Short answer is - no. I will address this in depth and other things next time. I'm ending this essay with some quotes from Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius, because I find myself inept in comparison to what they can convey about this subject. These are also helpful next time you choose to play with your perception.  
  
**Marcus Aurelius**  
  
*“The happiness of your life depends upon the quality of your thoughts.”  
  
“Everything we hear is an opinion, not a fact. Everything we see is a perspective, not the truth.”  
  
“The soul becomes dyed with the color of its thoughts.”  
  
“Very little is needed to make a happy life; it is all within yourself in your way of thinking.”  
  
“The first rule is to keep an untroubled spirit. The second is to look things in the face and know them for what they are.”  
  
“Choose not to be harmed—and you won’t feel harmed. Don’t feel harmed—and you haven’t been.”  
  
“Look well into thyself; there is a source of strength which will always spring up if thou wilt always look.”  
  
**Epictetus**  
  
“It's not what happens to you, but how you react to it that matters.”  
  
“Only the educated are free.”  
  
“There is only one way to happiness and that is to cease worrying about things which are beyond the power or our will. ”  
  
“Who is your master? Anyone who has control over things upon which you’ve set your heart, or over things which you seek to avoid.”  
  
“It isn’t the events themselves that disturb people, but only their judgements about them.”  
  
“To make the best of what is in our power, and take the rest as it occurs.”  
  
---  
  
  
Epictetus(55-135 CE) was a slave for much of his youth and began studying philosophy during his enslavement. He gained his freedom sometime after the death of and began to teach philosophy in Rome. He founded his own school of philosophy in Greece after Emperor Domitian banished all philosophers from Rome in 93 CE. ([Source]([https://classicalwisdom.com/philosophy/stoicism/epictetus-the-stoic-slave/](https://classicalwisdom.com/philosophy/stoicism/epictetus-the-stoic-slave/)))  
  
Whereas Marcus Aurelius was the emperor of Rome during the 2nd century AD. At the time of his death, he was one of the most powerful people on earth. He could have had anything he wanted, and few, if any, would dare challenge him on anything. And yet he proved himself deserving of the power he held. Today we are left with his journal, his [_Meditations_]([https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B000FC1JAI/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=farnamstreet-20&camp=1789&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=B000FC1JAI&linkId=9543b917fbf334681696a647858dd072](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B000FC1JAI/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=farnamstreet-20&camp=1789&creative=9325&linkCode=as2&creativeASIN=B000FC1JAI&linkId=9543b917fbf334681696a647858dd072)). The work is a landmark of Stoic philosophy that has guided both powerful and common men and women for thousands of years. Jack Dorsey, Theodore Roosevelt, George Washington, Bill Clinton, J.K Rowling and Tim Ferris are a few notable names who have been big proponents of Stoicism in the past century.  While _Meditations_ was never intended for publication, it remains in print to this day and is perhaps as popular as ever. ([Source]([https://fs.blog/intellectual-giants/marcus-aurelius/#:~:text=At%20the%20time%20of%20his,guided%20by%20virtue%20and%20wisdom.](https://fs.blog/intellectual-giants/marcus-aurelius/#:~:text=At%20the%20time%20of%20his,guided%20by%20virtue%20and%20wisdom.)))  

It's worth ruminating on the fact that a slave and one of the most powerful emperors to ever rule on Earth were guided by the same school of philosophy. 
 
  
Until next time,  
Nadish